DOMAIN NAMES AND ICANN

It became clear early on in the first days of the internet that an addressing method would need to be established and managed to make the disparate networks both knowable and reachable to searchers of information.  And, as addressing evolved and addresses themselves grew exponentially in numbers, indexing and management of that database would become essential to keeping the locations of these servers straight. 

Initially, addressing was strictly numerical, with the 32-bit IPv4 protocol as it’s base.  Using four sectors separated by decimals, the address grouped by country, then region, then subnet, then local address.  This partitioning provided for roughly 4 billion addresses but was challenging for users to keep track of regularly used sites..  The development of the DNS, or Domain Name System then evolved, which assigned alpha naming conventions to correspond to the underlying numerical system Hence, people could essentially design “vanity” names to websites, such as www.iloveNJIT.com, making repeat searching easier to remember.  Then, as number exhaust approached, the new IPv6 protocol, a 128-bit addressing structure, was undertaken to be implemented, which would increase available addressing space to 340 undecillion addresses.

At the outset, this alphanumeric address management function was managed by the US Department of Defense, under the umbrella of the ARPANET project, as addressing requirements were minimal.  As it began to proliferate, the address management function transitioned to the US Department of Commerce, and the NTIA division, under the stewardship of the founding chairwoman, Ester Dyson. The original charter had as its goals DNS management, addressing support, and protocol support. 

In September of 1998, however, ICANN assumed control of all of these functions, still with oversight from the US Department of Commerce.  However, International concerns around security and control began to surface, and deriving from a Memorandum of Understanding issued in 2006, ICANN subsequently entered the private sector as an independent entity not under the control of the US Government,  

Today, ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers) manages the naming conventions (domain name system) and the underlying numerical addresses (IPv4 and soon to be IPv6).

Established in 1998, ICANN owns and maintains all the databases that comprise the “Central Internet Addressing” pools formerly managed by the NTIA (National Telecommunication and Information Association).  ICANN is charged with Developing policy for the internet Domain Name System (DNS) and the associated software and hardware where such resides. They also manage the IPv4 and IPv6 numbering spaces described above, and the assignment of these numbering blocks to users and/or service providers who deploy them. 

ICANN’s mission is to provide and maintain operational stability of the Internet.  Located in Southern California, in the middle of Silicon Valley at the old Facebook facility, ICANN today continues their charter of address policy establishment and management, continuing to ensure searchability and “locate-ability” of information stored and accessed via the web around the world. 
