WHAT IS THE INTERNET?

The Internet has been defined as an “international connection of independently owned, autonomous networks, which support host to host connections and information exchange through the voluntary adherence by each user to open protocols and process definitions by international standards” (Hendela). It is a giant searchable network of multiple databases of information, where users can find answers to literally every question there is, somewhere. 

Vint Cerf, a co-founder and co-creator of the internet protocol on which the world wide web is based, has stated that the internet is not exactly a “thing”, but is really more of a design philosophy based upon agreements between users as to how shared information will be accessed and protected as it is transmitted.  It is these protocols which truly allow the successful sharing of information across physical facilities, or networks.

Developed by Paul Baran, an employee of the Department of Defense, the Internet began as Arpanet, a research project envisioned by the government as a fully distributed network of information that could survive physical attack by storing replicated information across multiple sites, preventing the risk associated with centralizing such repository.  Access to the information was similarly distributed, allowing information to still be reachable through alternate paths should arteries be disabled by attack or capture.  

Today, the architecture of the originally envisioned Arpanet has evolved considerably. physical facilities, or networks, are composed of servers, or computer housed databases, connected by mediums such as fiber, cable and wireless connections.  Addressing allows for information to be searched and protocols allows for requests to be routed and responded to expeditiously.  Security protocols protect both database providers and users from being hacked or misused by nefarious elements, and further protect the integrity of the data being exchanged for the parties engaged in each transaction. 

The internet of today has radically transformed nearly every area of human existence, from education and research to relationship management, commerce, and procurement of goods and services.  It is hard to imagine any area of life around the globe that has not been impacted by the advent of the internet. 

The World Wide Web, as the Internet is commonly called, was developed in 1989 by  Timothy Berners-Lee, and married the idea of linking hypertext with Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and DNS (domain name server).  This combination forever changed how information is stored and managed. For this reason, Timothy was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 2004 for his contributions to the betterment of mankind, and in 2007 was awarded membership into the prestigious Queen’s Order of Merit. 
